--- Page 1 of 26 ---
Bonn Guidelines on 
Access to Genetic 
Resources and Fair and
Equitable Sharing of the
Benefits Arising out of 
their Utilization 
Secretariat of the
Convention on
Biological Diversity
Bonn Guidline (Eng.)Cover  22/03/2003  18:03  Page 2

--- Page 2 of 26 ---
Bonn Guidelines 
on Access to Genetic Resources 
and Fair and Equitable Sharing 
of the Benefits Arising out of 
their Utilization

--- Page 3 of 26 ---
Copyright © Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, 2002
ISBN: 92-807-2255-7
This publication may be reproduced for educational or non-profit purposes without
special permission from the copyright holders, provided acknowledgement of the
source is made. The Secretariat of the Convention would appreciate receiving a copy of
any publications that uses this publication as a source.
For bibliographic and reference purpose this publication should be referred to as:
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2002). Bonn Guidelines on Access
to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of their
Utilization. Montreal: Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
For further information, please contact:
The Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity
Wo r l d  Trade Centre
393 St. Jacques, Suite 300
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2Y 1N9
Phone : 1 (514) 288 2220
Fax: 1 (514) 288 6588
e-mail: secretariat@biodiv.org
Website: http://www.biodiv .org
Printed on recycled paper
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
II

--- Page 4 of 26 ---
INTRODUCTION
Biological dive rsity—the variety within and among species and ecosystems—is
essential for our planet, human well-being and to the livelihood and cultural integrity of
people. Its gradual loss, as a result of a number of factors, represents a silent emergency
that threatens to undermine efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable
development throughout the world.
The 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity provides a comprehensive framework for
stopping that loss. It is a ca refully balanced, leg ally binding international treaty that
commits its Parties to the triple objective of conserving biological diversity, using
natural resources sustainably, and fairly and equitably sharing benefits deriving from
the use of genetic resources.
The latter objective is of particular importance to developing countries, as they hold
most of the world’s biological diversity but feel that, in general, they do not obtain a fair
share of th e benefits derived from the use of their resources for the development of
products such as high-yielding varieties, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics. Such a system
reduces th e incentive for the world’s biologically richer but economically poorer
countries to conserve and su stainably use their resources for the ultimate benefit of
everyone on Earth.
Article 15 of the Convention addresses the terms and conditions for access to genetic
resources and benefit-sharing. It recognizes the sovereignty of States over their natural
resources and provides that access to these resources shall be subject to the prior
informed consent of the Contracting Party providing such resources. It also provides
that access shall be based on mutually agreed terms in order to ensure the sharing of
benefits arising from the commercial or other utilization of these genetic resources with
the Contracting Party providing such resources.
Although the Convention on Biological Diversity was adopted in 1992 and entered into
force at the end of 1993, it was not until 1999 that work began in earnest to
operationalize these provisions. The result is the Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic
Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising Out of Their
Utilization, so named because of the location of the intergovernmental meeting in
October 2001 that prepared the first draft, which was eventually adopted, with some
changes, by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its sixth meeting, held in
The Hague in April 2002.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
III

--- Page 5 of 26 ---
The Guidelines are expected to assist Parties, Governments and other stakeholders in
developing overall access an d benefit-sharing strategies, and in identifying the steps
involved in the process of obtaining access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing.
More specifically, the guidelines are intended to help them when establishing legislative,
administrative or policy measures on access and benefit-sharing and/or when
negotiating contractual arrangements for access and benefit-sharing. A programme for
capacity-building is already under way to ensure that developing countries are in a
position to effectively implement the Guidelines and the corresponding provisions of
the Convention.
The Guidelines identify the steps in the access and benefit-sharing process, with 
an emphasis on the obligation for users to seek the prior informed consent of providers.
They also identify the basic requirements for mutually agreed terms and define the
main roles and responsibilities of users and providers and stress the importance of the
involvement of all stakeholders. They also cover other elements such as incentives,
accountability, means for verification and dispute settlement. Finally, they enumerate
suggested elem ents for inclusion in material transfer agreements and provide an
indicative list of both monetary and non-monetary benefits.
Although they are not legally binding, the fact that the Guidelines were adopted
unanimously by some 180 countries gives them a clear and indisputable authority and
provides welcome evidence of an international will to tackle difficult issues that require
a balance and compromise on all sides for the common good.
This will was reinforced by the call of the W orld Summit on Sustainable Development,
held in Johannesburg in August/September 2002, for countries to negotiate, within the
framework of th e Convention on Biological Dive rsity, an international regime to
promote and safeguard the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the
utilization of genetic resources. It is expected that the Bonn Guidelines will form part of
that broader framework and will serve as a vital tool for the full implementation of the
Convention and the safeguarding of the natural wealth on which all human societies
depend.
Hamdallah Zedan
Executive Secretary
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
IV

--- Page 6 of 26 ---
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Key features
1. These Guidelines may serve as inputs when developing and drafting
legislative, administrative or policy measures on access and benefit-sharing with
particular reference to provisions under Articles 8(j), 10 (c), 15, 16 and 19; and
contracts and other arrangements under mutually agreed terms for access and 
benefit-sharing.
2. Nothing in these Guidelines shall be construed as changing the rights and
obligations of Parties under the Convention on Biological Diversity.
3. Nothing in these Guidelines is intended to substitute for relevant national
legislation.
4. Nothing in these Guidelines should be interpreted to affect the sovereign
rights of States over their natural resources;
5. Nothing in these Guidelines, including the use of terms such as “provider”,
“user”, and “stakeholder”, should be interpreted to assign any rights over genetic
resources beyond those provided in accordance with the Convention;
6. Nothing in these Guidelines should be interpreted as affecting the rights and
obligations relating to genetic resources arising out of the mutually agreed terms under
which the resources were obtained from the country of origin.
7. The present Guidelines are voluntary and were prepared with a view to
ensuring their:
(a) Vo l u n t a r y  n a t u r e :they are intended to guide both users and providers 
of genetic resources on a voluntary basis;
(b) Ease of use: to maximize their utility and to accommodate a range of
applications, the Guidelines are simple;
(c) Practicality: the elements contained in the guidelines are practical and
are aimed at reducing transaction costs;
(d) Acceptability: the Guidelines are intended to gain the support of users
and providers;
(e) Complementarity:t h e  G u i delines and other international instruments
are mutually supportive;
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
1

--- Page 7 of 26 ---
(f) Evolutionary approach:t h e  G u i delines are intended to be reviewed and
accordingly revised and improved as experience is gained in access and
benefit-sharing;
(g) Flexibility:t o  b e  u s e f u l  a c r oss a range of sectors, users and national
circumstances and jurisdictions, guidelines should be flexible;
(h) Tran sparency:t h e y  a r e  i n t e n d e d  t o  p r o mote transparency in the
negotiation and implementation of access and benefit-sharing
arrangements.
B. Use of terms
8. The terms as defined in Article 2 of the Convention shall apply to these
Guidelines. These include: biological diversity, biological resources, biotechnology,
country of origin of genetic resources, country providing genetic resources,ex situ
conservation,in situ conservation, genetic material, genetic resources, and in situ
conditions.
C. Scope
9. All genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, innovations and
practices covered by the Convention on Biological Diversity and benefits arising from
the commercial and other utilization of such resources should be covered by the
guidelines, with the exclusion of human genetic resources.
D. Relationship with relevant international regimes
10. The guidelines should be applied in a manner that is coherent and mutually
supportive of the work of relevant international agreements and institutions. The
guidelines are without prejudice to the access and benefit-sharing provisions of the FAO
International Treaty for Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture.Furthermore,
the work of the W orld Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) on issues of relevance
to access and benefit-sharing should be taken into account. The application of the
guidelines should also take into account existing regional legislation and agreements on
access and benefit-sharing.
E. Objectives
11. The objectives of the Guidelines are the following:
(a) T o contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity;
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
2

--- Page 8 of 26 ---
(b) T o provide Parties and stakeholders with a transparent framework to
facilitate access to genetic resources and ensure fair and equitable
sharing of benefits;
(c) T o provide guidance to Parties in the development of access and benefit-
sharing regimes;
(d) T o inform the practices and approaches of stakeholders (users and
providers) in access and benefit-sharing arrangements;
(e) T o provide capacity-building to guarantee the effective negotiation and
implementation of access and benefit-sharing arrangements, especially
to developing countries,in particular least developed countries and small
island developing States among them;
(f) T o promote awareness on implementation of relevant provisions of the
Convention on Biological Diversity;
(g) T o promote the adequate and effective transfer of appropriate technology
to providing Parties, especially developing countries, in particular least
developed countries and small island developing States among them,
stakeholders and indigenous and local communities;
(h) T o promote the provision of necessary financial resources to providing
countries that are developing countries, in particular least developed
countries and small island developing States among them, or countries
with economies in transition with a view to contributing to the
achievement of the objectives mentioned above;
(i) T o strengthen the clearing-house mechanism as a mechanism for
cooperation among Parties in access and benefit-sharing;
(j) T o contribute to the development by Parties of mechanisms and access
and benefit-sharing regimes that recognize the protection of traditional
knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local
communities, in accordance with domestic laws and relevant
international instruments;
(k) T o contribute to poverty alleviation and be supportive to the realization
of human food security, health and cultural integrity, especially in
developing countries, in particular least developed countries and small
island developing States among them;
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
3

--- Page 9 of 26 ---
(l) T axonomic research, as specified in the Global T axonomy Initiative,
should not be prevented,and providers should facilitate acquisition of
material for systematic use and users should make available all
information associated with the specimens thus obtained.
12. The Guidelines are intended to assist Parties in developing an overall access
and benefit-sharing strategy, which may be part of their national biodiversity strategy
and action plan, and in identifying the steps involved in the process of obtaining access
to genetic resources and sharing benefits.
II. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN ACCESS AND 
BENEFIT-SHARING PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 15 OF THE
CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY 
A. National focal point
13. Each Party should designate one national focal point for access and benefit-
sharing and make such information available through the clearing-house mechanism.
The national focal point should inform applicants for access to genetic resources on
procedures for acquiring prior informed consent and mutually agreed terms, including
benefit-sharing, and on competent national authorities, relevant indigenous and local
communities and relevant stakeholders, through the clearing-house mechanism.
B. Competent national authority(ies)
14. Competent national authorities, where they are established, may,
in accordance with applicable national legislative, administrative or policy measures,
be responsible for granting access and be responsible for advising on:
(a) The negotiating process;
(b) Requirements for obtaining prior informed consent and entering into
mutually agreed terms;
(c) Monitoring and evaluation of access and benefit-sharing agreements;
(d) Implementation/enforcement of access and benefit-sharing agreements;
(e) Processing of applications and approval of agreements;
(f) The conservation and sustainable use of the genetic resources accessed;
(g) Mechanisms for the effective participation of different stakeholders,
as appropriate for the different steps in the process of access and benefit-
sharing, in particular, indigenous and local communities;
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
4

--- Page 10 of 26 ---
(h) Mechanisms for the effective participation of indigenous and local
communities while promoting the objective of having decisions and
processes available in a language understandable to relevant indigenous
and local communities.
15. The competent national authority(ies) that have the legal power to grant prior
informed consent may delegate this power to other entities, as appropriate.
C. Responsibilities
16. Recognizing that Parties and stakeholders may be both users and providers,
the following balanced list of roles and responsibilities provides key elements to be
acted upon:
(a) Contracting Parties which are countries of origin of genetic resources, or
other Parties which have acquired the genetic resources in accordance
with the Convention, should:
(i) Be encouraged to review their policy, administrative and legislative
measures to ensure they are fully complying with Article 15 of the
Convention;
(ii) Be encouraged to report on access applications through the
clearing-house mechanism and other reporting channels of the
Convention;
(iii) Seek to ensure that the commercialization and any other use of
genetic resources should not prevent traditional use of genetic
resources;
(iv) Ensure that they fulfil their roles and responsibilities in a clear,
objective and transparent manner;
(v) Ensure that all stakeholders take into consideration the
environmental consequences of the access activities;
(vi) Establish mechanisms to ensure that their decisions are made
available to relevant indigenous and local communities and relevant
stakeholders, particularly indigenous and local communities;
(vii) Support measures, as appropriate, to enhance indigenous and local
communities’capacity to represent their interests fully at
negotiations;
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
5

--- Page 11 of 26 ---
(b) In the implementation of mutually agreed terms, users should:
(i) Seek informed consent prior to  access to genetic resources,
in conformity with Article 15, paragraph 5, of the Convention;
(ii) Respect customs, traditions, values and customary practices 
of indigenous and local communities,
(iii) Respond to requests for information from indigenous and 
local communities;
(iv) Only use genetic resources for purposes consistent with the terms
and conditions under which they were acquired;
(v) Ensure that uses of genetic resources for purposes other than those
for which they were acquired, only take place after new prior
informed consent and mutually agreed terms are given;
(vi) Maintain all relevant data regarding the genetic resources,
especially documentary evidence of the prior informed consent and
information concerning the origin and the use of genetic resources
and the benefits arising from such use;
(vii) As much as possible endeavour to carry out their use of the genetic
resources in, and with the participation of, the providing country;
(viii) When supplying genetic resources to third parties, honour any
terms and conditions regarding the acquired material. They should
provide this third party with relevant data on their acquisition,
including prior informed consent and conditions of use and record
and maintain data on their supply to third parties. Special terms
and conditions should be established under mutually agreed terms
to facilitate taxonomic research for non-commercial purposes;
(ix) Ensure the fair and equitable sharing of benefits, including
technology transfer to providing countries, pursuant to Article 16 of
the Convention arising from the commercialization or other use of
genetic resources, in conformity with the mutually agreed terms
they established with the indigenous and local communities or
stakeholders involved;
(c) Providers should:
(i) Only supply genetic resources and/or traditional knowledge when
they are entitled to do so;
(ii) Strive to avoid imposition of arbitrary restrictions on access to
genetic resources.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
6

--- Page 12 of 26 ---
(d) Contracting Parties with users of genetic resources under their
jurisdiction should take appropriate legal, administrative, or policy
measures, as appropriate, to support compliance with prior informed
consent of the Contracting Party providing such resources and mutually
agreed terms on which access was granted. These countries could
consider,inter alia,t h e  f o l l o wi n g  m e a s u r e s :
(i) Mechanisms to provide information to potential users on their
obligations regarding access to genetic resources;
(ii) Measures to encourage the disclosure of the country of origin of the
genetic resources and of the origin of traditional knowledge,
innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities 
in applications for intellectual property rights;
(iii) Measures aimed at preventing the use of genetic resources obtained
without the prior informed consent of the Contracting Party
providing such resources;
(iv) Cooperation between Contracting Parties to address alleged
infringements of access and benefit-sharing agreements;
(v) V oluntary certification schemes for institutions abiding by rules on
access and benefit-sharing;
(vi) Measures discouraging unfair trade practices;
(vii) Other measures that encourage users to comply with provisions
under subparagraph 16 (b) above.
III. PARTICIPATION OF STAKEHOLDERS
17. Involvement of relevant stakeholders is essential to ensure the adequate
development and implementation of access and benefit-sharing arrangements.
However, due to the diversity of stakeholders and their diverging interests, their
appropriate involvement can only be determined on a case-by-case basis.
18. Relevant stakeholders should be consulted and their views taken into
consideration in each step of the process, including:
(a) When determining access, negotiating and implementing mutually
agreed terms, and in the sharing of benefits;
(b) In the development of a national strategy, policies or regimes on access
and benefit-sharing.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
7

--- Page 13 of 26 ---
19. T o facilitate the involvement of relevant stakeholders, including indigenous
and local communities, appropriate consultative arrangements, such as national
consultative committees, comprising relevant stakeholder representatives, should 
be made.
20. The involvement of relevant stakeholders should be promoted by:
(a) Providing information, especially regarding scientific and legal advice,
in order for them to be able to participate effectively;
(b) Providing support for capacity-building, in order for them to be actively
engaged in various stages of access and benefit-sharing arrangements,
such as in the development and implementation of mutually agreed
terms and contractual arrangements.
21. The stakeholders involved in access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing
may wish to seek the support of a mediator or facilitator when negotiating mutually
agreed terms.
IV. STEPS IN THE ACCESS AND 
BENEFIT-SHARING PROCESS
A. Overall strategy
22. Access and benefit-sharing systems should be based on an overall access and
benefit-sharing strategy at the country or regional level. This access and benefit-sharing
strategy should aim at the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, and
may be part of a national biodiversity strategy and action plan and promote the
equitable sharing of benefits.
B. Identification of steps
23. The steps involved in the process of obtaining access to genetic resources and
sharing of benefits may include activities prior to access, research and development
conducted on the genetic resources, as well as their commercialization and other uses,
including benefit-sharing.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
8

--- Page 14 of 26 ---
C. Prior informed consent
24. As provided for in Article 15 of the Convention on Biological Diversity, which
recognizes the sovereign rights of States over their natural resources, each Contracting
Party to the Convention shall endeavour to create conditions to facilitate access to
genetic resources for environmentally sound uses by other Contracting Parties and fair
and equitable sharing of benefits arising from such uses. In accordance with Article 15,
paragraph 5, of the Convention on Biological Diversity, access to genetic resources shall
be subject to prior informed consent ofthe contracting Party providing such resources,
unless otherwise determined by that Party .
25. Against this background, the Guidelines are intended to assist Parties in the
establishment of a system of prior informed consent, in accordance with Article 15,
paragraph 5, of the Convention.
1. Basic principles of a prior informed consent system
26. The basic principles of a prior informed consent system should include:
(a) Legal certainty and clarity;
(b) Access to genetic resources should be facilitated at minimum cost;
(c) Restrictions on access to genetic resources should be transparent, based
on legal grounds, and not run counter to the objectives of the Convention;
(d) Consent of the relevant competent national authority(ies) in the provider
country. The consent of relevant stakeholders, such as indigenous and
local communities, as appropriate to the circumstances and subject to
domestic law, should also be obtained.
2. Elements of a prior informed consent system
27. Elements of a prior informed consent system may include:
(a) Competent authority(ies) granting or providing for evidence of prior
informed consent;
(b) Timing and deadlines;
(c) Specification of use;
(d) Procedures for obtaining prior informed consent;
(e) Mechanism for consultation of relevant stakeholders;
(f) Process.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
9

--- Page 15 of 26 ---
Competent authority(ies) granting prior informed consent
28. Prior informed consent for access to in situ genetic resources shall  be
obtained from the Contracting Party providing such resources, through  its competent
national authority(ies), unless otherwise determined by  that Party.
29. In accordance with national legislation, prior informed consent may be
required from different levels of Government. Requirements for obtaining prior
informed consent (national/provincial/local) in the provider country should therefore
be specified.
30. National procedures should facilitate the involvement of all relevant
stakeholders from the community to the government level, aiming at simplicity and
clarity.
31. Respecting established legal rights of indigenous and local communities
associated with the genetic resources being accessed or where traditional knowledge
associated with these genetic resources is being accessed, the prior informed consent of
indigenous and local communities and the approval and involvement of the holders of
traditional knowledge, innovations and practices should be obtained, in accordance
with their traditional practices, national access policies and subject to domestic laws.
32. For ex situ collections, prior informed consent should be obtained from the
competent national authority(ies) and/or the body governing the ex situ collection
concerned as appropriate.
Timing and deadlines
33. Prior informed consent is to be sought adequately in advance to be
meaningful both for those seeking and for those granting access. Decisions  on
applications for access to genetic resources should also be taken within  a reasonable
period of time.
Specification of use
34. Prior informed consent should be based on the specific uses for which consent
has been granted.While prior informed consent may be granted initially for specific
use(s), any change of use including transfer to third parties may require a new
application for prior informed consent. Permitted uses should be clearly stipulated and
further prior informed consent for changes or unforeseen uses should be required.
Specific needs of taxonomic and systematic research as specified by the Global
Ta xo n o m y  I n i t i a t i ve  s h o u l d  be taken into consideration.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
10

--- Page 16 of 26 ---
35. Prior informed consent is linked to the requirement of mutually agreed terms.
Procedures for obtaining prior informed consent
36. An application for access could require the following information to be
provided, in order for the competent authority to determine whether or not access to a
genetic resource should be granted. This list is indicative and should be adapted to
national circumstances:
(a) Legal entity and affiliation of the applicant and/or collector and contact
person when the applicant is an institution;
(b) T ype and quantity of genetic resources to which access is sought;
(c) Starting date and duration of the activity;
(d) Geographical prospecting area;
(e) Evaluation of how the access activity may impact on conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity, to determine the relative costs and
benefits of granting access;
(f) Accurate information regarding intended use (e.g.: taxonomy, collection,
research, commercialization);
(g) Identification of where the research and development will take place;
(h) Information on how the research and development is to be carried out;
(i) Identification of local bodies for collaboration in research and
development;
(j) Possible third party involvement;
(k) Purpose of the collection, research and expected results;
(l) Kinds/types of benefits that could come from obtaining access to the
resource, including benefits from derivatives and products arising from
the commercial and other utilization of the genetic resource;
(m) Indication of benefit-sharing arrangements;
(n) Budget;
(o) T reatment of confidential information.
37. Permission to access genetic resources does not necessarily imply permission
to use associated knowledge and vice versa.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
11

--- Page 17 of 26 ---
Process
38. Applications for access to genetic resources through prior informed consent
and decisions by the competent authority(ies) to grant access to genetic resources or not
shall be documented in written form.
39. The competent authority could grant access by issuing a permit or licence or
following other appropriate procedures.A national registration system could be used 
to record the issuance of all permits or licences, on the basis of duly completed
application forms.
40. The procedures for obtaining an access permit/licence should be transparent
and accessible by any interested party.
D. Mutually agreed terms
41. In accordance with Article 15, paragraph 7, of the Convention on Biological
Diversity, each Contracting Party shall “take legislative, administrative or policy
measures, as appropriate (...) with the aim of sharing in a fair and equitable way the
results of research and development and the benefits arising from the commercial and
other utilization of genetic resources with the Contracting Party providing such
resources. Such sharing shall be upon mutually agreed terms”. Thus, guidelines should
assist Parties and stakeholders in the development of mutually agreed terms to ensure
the fair and equitable sharing of benefits.
1. Basic requirements for mutually agreed terms
42. The following principles or basic requirements could be considered for the
development of mutually agreed terms:
(a) Legal certainty and clarity;
(b) Minimization of transaction costs, by, for example:
(i) Establishing and promoting awareness of the Government’s and
relevant stakeholders’ requirements for prior informed consent and
contractual arrangements;
(ii) Ensuring awareness of existing mechanisms for applying for access,
entering into arrangements and ensuring the sharing of benefits;
(iii) Developing framework agreements, under which repeat access
under expedited arrangements can be made;
(iv) Developing standardized material transfer agreements and benefit-
sharing arrangements for similar resources and similar uses (see
appendix I for suggested elements of such an agreement);
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
12

--- Page 18 of 26 ---
(c) Inclusion of provisions on user and provider obligations;
(d) Development of different contractual arrangements for different
resources and for different uses and development of model agreements;
(e) Different uses may include, inter alia, taxonomy, collection, research,
commercialization;
(f) Mutually agreed terms should be negotiated efficiently and within 
a reasonable period of time;
(g) Mutually agreed terms should be set out in a written agreement.
43. The following elements could be considered as guiding parameters in
contractual agreements. These elements could also be considered as basic requirements
for mutually agreed terms:
(a) Regulating the use of resources in order to take into account ethical
concerns of the particular Parties and stakeholders, in particular
indigenous and local communities concerned;
(b) Making provision to ensure the continued customary use of genetic
resources and related knowledge;
(c) Provision for the use of intellectual property rights include joint research,
obligation to implement rights on inventions obtained and to provide
licences by common consent;
(d) The possibility of joint ownership of intellectual property rights
according to the degree of contribution.
2. Indicative list of typical mutually agreed terms
44. The following provides an indicative list of typical mutually agreed terms:
(a) T ype and quantity of genetic resources, and the geographical/ecological
area of activity;
(b) Any limitations on the possible use of the material;
(c) Recognition of the sovereign rights of the country of origin;
(d) Capacity-building in various areas to be identified in the agreement;
(e) A clause on whether the terms of the agreement in certain circumstances
(e.g. change of use) can be renegotiated;
(f) Whether the genetic resources can be transferred to third parties and
conditions to be imposed in such cases, e.g. whether or not to pass
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
13

--- Page 19 of 26 ---
genetic resources to third parties without ensuring that the third parties
enter into similar agreements except for taxonomic and systematic
research that is not related to commercialization;
(g) Whether the knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and
local communities have been respected, preserved and maintained, and
whether the customary use of biological resources in accordance with
traditional practices has been protected and encouraged;
(h) T reatment of confidential information;
(i) Provisions regarding the sharing of benefits arising from the commercial
and other utilization of genetic resources and their derivatives and
products.
3. Benefit-sharing
45. Mutually agreed terms could cover the conditions, obligations, procedures,
types,ti ming, distribution and mechanisms of benefits to be shared. These will vary
depending on what is regarded as fair and equitable in light of the circumstances.
Ty pes ofbenefits
46. Examples of monetary and non-monetary benefits are provided in appendix
II to these Guidelines.
Timing of benefits
47. Near-term, medium-term and long-term benefits should be considered,
including up-front payments, milestone payments and royalties. The time-frame 
of benefit-sharing should be definitely stipulated. Furthermore, the balance among
near-term, medium-term and long-term benefit should be considered on a 
case-by-case basis.
Distribution of benefits
48. Pursuant to mutually agreed terms established following prior informed
consent, benefits should be shared fairly and equitably with all those who have been
identified as having contributed to the resource management, scientific and/or
commercial process. The latter may include governmental, non-governmental or
academic institutions and indigenous and local communities. Benefits should be
directed in such a way as to promote conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
14

--- Page 20 of 26 ---
Mechanisms for benefit-sharing
49. Mechanisms for benefit-sharing may vary depending upon the type of
benefits, the specific conditions in the country and the stakeholders involved. The
benefit-sharing mechanism should be flexible as it should be determined by the
partners involved in benefit-sharing and will vary on a case-by-case basis.
50. Mechanisms for sharing benefits should include full cooperation in scientific
research and technology development, as well as those that derive from commercial
products including trust funds, joint ventures and licences with preferential terms.
V. OTHER PROVISIONS
A. Incentives
51. The following incentive measures exemplify measures which could 
be used in the implementation of the guidelines:
(a) The identifica tion and mitigation or removal of perverse incentives, that
may act as obstacles for conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity through access and benefit-sharing, should be considered;
(b) The use of well-designed economic and regulatory instruments, directly
or indirectly related to access and benefit-sharing, should be considered
to foster equitable and efficient allocation of benefits;
(c) The use of valuation methods should be considered as a tool to inform
users and providers involved in access and benefit-sharing;
(d) The creation and use of markets should be considered as a way of
efficiently achieving conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity.
B. Accountability in implementing access and 
benefit-sharing arrangements
52. Parties should endeavour to establish mechanisms to promote accountability
by all stakeholders involved in access and benefit-sharing arrangements.
53. T o promote accountability, Parties may consider establishing requirements
regarding:
(a) Reporting; and
(b) Disclosure of information.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
15

--- Page 21 of 26 ---
54. The individual collector or institution on whose behalf the collector 
is operating should, where appropriate, be responsible and accountable for the
compliance of the collector.
C. National monitoring and reporting
55. Depending on the terms of access and benefit-sharing, national monitoring
may include:
(a) Whether the use of genetic resources is in compliance with the terms 
of access and benefit-sharing;
(b) Research and development process;
(c) Applications for intellectual property rights relating to the material
supplied.
56. The involvement of relevant stakeholders, in particular, indigenous and local
communities, in the various stages of development and implementation of access and
benefit-sharing arrangements can play an important role in facilitating the monitoring
of compliance.
D. Means for verification
57. V oluntary verification mechanisms could be developed at the national level to
ensure compliance with the access and benefit-sharing provisions of the Convention on
Biological Diversity and national legal instruments of the country of origin providing
the genetic resources.
58. A system of voluntary certification could serve as a means to verify the
transparency of the process of access and benefit-sharing. Such a system could certify
that the access and benefit-sharing provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity
have been complied with.
E. Settlement of disputes
59. As most obligations arising under mutually agreed arrangements will be
between providers and users, disputes arising in these arrangements should be solved
in accordance with the relevant contractual arrangements on access and benefit-
sharing and the applicable law and practices.
60. In cases where the access and benefit-sharing agreements consistent with the
Convention on Biological Diversity and national legal instruments of the country of
origin of genetic resources have not been complied with, the use of sanctions could be
considered, such as penalty fees set out in contractual agreements.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
16

--- Page 22 of 26 ---
F. Re m e di e s  
61. Parties may take appropriate effective and proportionate measures for
violations of national legislative, administrative or policy measures implementing the
access and benefit-sharing provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity,
including requirements related to prior informed consent and mutually agreed terms.
Appendix I
SUGGESTED ELEMENTS FOR MATERIAL
TRANSFER AGREEMENTS
Material transfer agreements may contain wording on the following elements:
A. Introductory provisions
1. Preambular reference to the Convention on Biological Diversity 
2. Legal status of the provider and user of genetic resources
3. Mandate and/or general objectives of provider and, where appropriate, user 
of genetic resources
B. Access and benefit-sharing provisions
1. Description of genetic resources covered by the material transfer agreements,
including accompanying information
2. Permitted uses, bearing in mind the potential uses, of the genetic resources,
their products or derivatives under the material transfer agreement 
(e.g. research, breeding, commercialization) 
3. Statement that any change of use would require new prior informed consent
and material transfer agreement
4. Whether intellectual property rights may be sought and if so under 
what conditions 
5. T erms of benefit-sharing arrangements, including commitment to share
monetary and non-monetary benefits 
6. No warranties guaranteed by provider on identity and/or quality of the
provided material
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
17

--- Page 23 of 26 ---
7. Whether the genetic resources and/or accompanying information may be
transferred to third parties and ifso conditions that should apply 
8. Definitions
9. Duty to minimize environmental impacts of collecting activities
C. Legal provisions
1. Obligation to comply with the material transfer agreement
2. Duration of agreement
3. Notice to terminate the agreement
4. Fact that the obligations in certain clauses survive the termination 
of the agreement
5. Independent enforceability of individual clauses in the agreement
6. Events limiting the liability of either party (such as act of God, fire, flood, etc.)
7. Dispute settlement arrangements
8. Assignment or transfer of rights
9. Assignment, transfer or exclusion of the right to claim any property rights,
including intellectual property rights, over the genetic resources received
through the material transfer agreement
10. Choice of law
11. Confidentiality clause
12. Guarantee
Appendix II 
MONETARY AND NON- MONETARY BENEFITS 
1. Monetary benefits may include, but not be limited to:
(a) Access fees/fee per sample collected or otherwise acquired;
(b) Up-front payments;
(c) Milestone payments;
(d) Payment of royalties;
(e) Licence fees in case of commercialization;
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
18

--- Page 24 of 26 ---
(f) Special fees to be paid to trust funds supporting conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity;
(g) Salaries and preferential terms where mutually agreed;
(h) Research funding;
(i) Joint ventures;
(j) Joint ownership of relevant intellectual property rights.
2. Non-monetary benefits may include, but not be limited to:
(a) Sharing of research and development results;
(b) Collaboration, cooperation and contribution in scientific research
and development programmes, particularly biotechnological
research activities, where possible in the provider country;
(c) Participation in product development;
(d) Collaboration, cooperation and contribution in education 
and training;
(e) Admittance to ex situ facilities of genetic resources and 
to databases;
(f) T ransfer to the provider of the genetic resources of knowledge and
technology under fair and most favourable terms, including on
concessional and preferential terms where agreed, in particular,
knowledge and technology that make use of genetic resources,
including biotechnology, or that are relevant to the conservation 
and sustainable utilization of biological diversity;
(g) Strengthening capacities for technology transfer to user developing
country Parties and to Parties that are countries with economies 
in transition and technology development in the country of origin
that provides genetic resources.Also to facilitate abilities of
indigenous and local communities to conserve and sustainably 
use their genetic resources;
(h) Institutional capacity-building;
(i) Human and material resources to strengthen the capacities for the
administration and enforcement of access regulations;
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
19

--- Page 25 of 26 ---
(j) T raining related to genetic resources with the full participation of
providing Parties, and where possible, in such Parties;
(k) Access to scientific information relevant to conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity, including biological
inventories and taxonomic studies;
(l) Contributions to the local economy;
(m) Research directed towards priority needs, such as health and food
security, taking into account domestic uses of genetic resources in
provider countries;
(n) Institutional and professional relationships that can arise from an
access and benefit-sharing agreement and subsequent collaborative
activities;
(o) Food and li velihood security benefits;
(p) Social recognition;
(q) Joint ownership of relevant intellectual property rights.
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization 
20

--- Page 26 of 26 ---
Bonn Guidline (Eng.)Cover  22/03/2003  18:03  Page 1
